sun tzu and the art of war
chapter one
laying plans
suntsu said the art of war is of vital
importance to the state
it is a matter of life and death a road
either to safety or to ruin
hence it is a subject of inquiry which
can on no account be neglected
the art of war then is governed by five
constant factors to be taken into
account in one's deliberations when
seeking to determine the conditions
obtaining in the field
these are
one the moral law
two
heaven
three
earth
four
the commander
five method and discipline
the moral law causes the people to be in
complete accord with their ruler so that
they will follow him regardless of their
lives undismayed by any danger
heaven signifies night and day cold and
heat times and seasons
earth comprises distances great and
small
danger and security open ground and
narrow passes the chances of life and
death
the commander stands for the virtues of
wisdom sincerity benevolence courage and
strictness
by method and discipline are to be
understood the marshalling of the army
in its proper subdivisions
the graduations of rank among the
officers the maintenance of roads by
which supplies may reach the army and
the control of military expenditure
these five heads should be familiar to
every general he who knows them will be
victorious he who knows him not will
fail
therefore in your deliberations when
seeking to determine the military
conditions let them be made the basis of
a comparison
in this wise
one
which of the two sovereigns is imbued
with the moral law
two
which of the two generals has most
ability
three with whom let the advantages
derive from heaven and earth
four
on which side is discipline most
rigorously enforced
five which army is stronger
six on which side are officers and men
more highly trained
seven
in which army is there the greater
constancy both in reward and punishment
by means of these seven considerations i
can forecast victory or defeat
the general that hearkens to my council
and acts upon it will conquer
let such a one be retained in command
the general that hearkens not to my
council nor acts upon it will suffer
defeat
let such a one be dismissed
while heeding the prophet of my counsel
avail yourselves also of any helpful
circumstances over and beyond the
ordinary rules
accordingly as circumstances are
favorable one should modify one's plans
all warfare is based on deception hence
when able to attack we must seem unable
when using our forces we must seem
inactive when we are near we must make
the enemy believe we are far away when
far away we must make him believe we are
near
hold out baits to entice the enemy feign
disorder and crush him
if he is secure at all points be
prepared for him if he is in superior
strength evade him
if your opponent is a calyric temper
seek to irritate him pretend to be weak
that he may grow arrogant
if he is taking his ease give him no
rest if his forces are united separate
them
attack him when he is unprepared appear
where you are not expected
these military devices leading to
victory must not be divulged beforehand
now the general who wins a battle makes
many calculations in his temple heir the
battle is fought
the general who loses a battle makes but
few calculations beforehand
thus do many calculations lead to
victory and few calculations to defeat
how much more no calculation at all
it is by attention to this point that i
can foresee who is likely to win or lose
chapter 2
waging war
suntsu said in the operations of war
where there are in the field a thousand
swift chariots
as many heavy chariots and a hundred
thousand male glad soldiers with
provisions enough to carry them a
thousandly
the expenditure at home and at the front
including entertainment of guests small
items such as glue and paint and some
spent on chariots and armor
will reach the total of a thousand
ounces of silver per day
such is the cost of raising an army of
one hundred thousand men
when you engage in actual fighting if
victory is long in coming then men's
weapons will grow dull and their ardor
will be damped
if you lay siege to a town you will
exhaust your strength
again if the campaign is protracted the
resources of the state will not be equal
to the strain
now when your weapons are dulled your
ardor damped your strength exhausted and
your treasure spent
other chieftains will spring up to take
advantage of your extremity
then no man however wise will be able to
avert the consequences that must ensue
thus though we have heard of stupid
haste in war cleverness has never been
seen associated with long delays
there is no instance of a country having
benefited from prolonged war it is only
one who is thoroughly acquainted with
the evils of war
that can thoroughly understand the
profitable way of carrying it on
a skillful soldier does not raise a
second levy neither are his supply
wagons loaded more than twice
bring war material with you from home
but forage on the enemy
thus the army will have food enough for
its needs
poverty of the state exchequer causes an
army to be maintained by contributions
from a distance
contributing to maintain an army at a
distance causes the people to be
impoverished
on the other hand the proximity of an
army causes prices to go up
and high prices cause the people's
substance to be drained away
when their substance is drained away the
peasantry will be afflicted by heavy
exactions
with this loss of substance and
exhaustion of strength the homes of the
people will be stripped bare and three
tenths of their income will be
dissipated while government expenses for
broken chariots worn out horses
breastplates and helmets bows and arrows
spears and shields protective mantles
draft oxen and heavy wagons will amount
to four tenths of its total revenue
hence a wise general makes a point of
foraging on the enemy
one cartload of the enemy's provisions
is equivalent to 20 of one's own and
likewise a single pickle from his
prevender is equal to 20 from one's own
store
now
in order to kill the enemy our men must
be roused to anger
that there may be advantage from
defeating the enemy they must have their
rewards
therefore in chariot fighting when ten
or more chariots have been taken those
should be rewarded who took the first
our own flag should be substituted for
those of the enemy and the chariots
mingled and used in conjunction with our
own
the captured soldiers should be kindly
treated and kept
this is called using the conquered foe
to augment one's own strength
in war then let your great object be
victory not lengthy campaigns thus it
may be known that the leader of armies
is the arbiter of the people's fate the
man on whom it depends whether the
nation shall be in peace or in peril
chapter 3 attack by stratagem
sun tzu said
in the practical art of war the best
thing of all is to take the enemy's
country whole and intact to shout and
destroy it is not so good so too it is
better to recapture an army entire than
to destroy it to capture a regiment a
detachment or a company entire than to
destroy them
hence to fight and conquer in all your
battles is not supreme excellence
supreme excellence consists in breaking
the enemy's resistance without fighting
thus the highest form of generalship is
to bulk the enemy's plans the next best
is to prevent the junction of the
enemy's forces the next in order is to
attack the enemy's army in the field and
the worst policy of all is to besiege
walled cities
the rule is not to besiege walled cities
if it can possibly be avoided the
preparation of mantlets movable shelters
and various implements of war will take
up three whole months and the piling up
of mounds over against the walls will
take three months more
the general unable to control his
irritation will launch his men to the
assault like swarming ants with the
result that one third of his men are
slain while the town still remains
untaken
such are the disastrous effects of a
siege
therefore the skilled leader subdues the
enemy's troops without any fighting he
captures their cities without laying
siege to them he overthrows their
kingdom without lengthy operations in
the field
with his forces intact he will dispute
the mastery of the empire and thus
without losing a man his triumph will be
complete
this is the method of attacking by
stratagem
it is the rule in war if our forces are
tend to the enemies one to surround him
if five to one to attack him if twice as
numerous to divide our army into two
if equally matched we can offer battle
is slightly inferior in numbers we can
avoid the enemy
if quite unequal in every way we can
flee from him
hence though an obstinate fight may be
made by a small force
in the end it must be captured by the
larger force
now the general is the bulwark of the
state if the bulwark is complete at all
points the state will be strong
if the bulwark is defective the state
will be weak
there are three ways in which a ruler
can bring misfortune upon his army
by commanding the army to advance or to
retreat being ignorant to the fact that
it cannot obey
this is called hobbling the army
by attempting to govern an army in the
same way as he administers a kingdom
being ignorant of the conditions which
obtain an army this causes restlessness
in the soldiers minds
by employing the officers of his army
without discrimination through ignorance
of the military principle of adaption to
circumstances
this shakes the confidence of the
soldiers
but when the army is restless and
distrustful trouble is sure to come from
the other feudal princes
this is simply bringing anarchy into the
army and flinging victory away
thus we may know that there are five
essentials for victory
one he will win who knows when to fight
and when not to fight
two he will win who knows how to handle
both superior and inferior forces
3. he will win whose army is animated by
the same spirit throughout all its ranks
4. he will win who prepared himself
waits to take the enemy unprepared
5. he will win who has military capacity
and is not interfered with by the
sovereign
hence the saying
if you know the enemy and know yourself
you need not fear the result of a
hundred battles
if you know yourself but not the enemy
for every victory gained you will also
suffer a defeat
if you know neither the enemy nor
yourself you will succumb in every
battle
chapter 4 tactical dispositions
suntsu said the good fighters of old
first put themselves beyond the
possibility of defeat and then waited
for an opportunity of defeating the
enemy
to secure ourselves against defeat lies
in our own hands but the opportunity of
defeating the enemy is provided by the
enemy himself
thus the good fighter is able to secure
himself against defeat but cannot make
certain of defeating the enemy
hence the saying one may know how to
conquer without being able to do it
security against defeat implies
defensive tactics
ability to defeat the enemy means taking
the offensive
standing on the defensive indicates
insufficient strength
attacking a super abundance of strength
the general who is skilled in defense
hides in the most secret recesses of the
earth
he who is skilled in attack flashes
falls from the topmost heights of heaven
thus on one hand we have ability to
protect ourselves on the other a victory
that is complete
to see victory only when it is within
the can of the common herd is not the
acme of excellence
neither is it the acme of excellence if
you fight and conquer and the whole
empire says well done
to lift an autumn hair is no sign of
great strength
to see the sun and moon is no sign of
sharp sight
to hear the noise of thunder is no sign
of a quick ear
what the ancients called a clever
fighter is one who not only wins but
excels in winning with ease
hence his victories bring him neither
reputation for wisdom nor credit for
courage
he wins his battles by making no
mistakes making no mistakes is what
establishes the certainty of victory for
it means conquering an enemy that is
already defeated
hence the skillful fighter puts himself
into a position which makes defeat
impossible and does not miss the moment
for defeating the enemy
thus it is that in war the victorious
strategist only seeks battle after the
victory has been won whereas he who is
destined to defeat first fights and
afterwards looks for victory
the consummate leader cultivates the
moral law and strictly adheres to method
and discipline
thus it is in his power to control
success
in respect of military method we have
firstly measurement
secondly estimation of quantity
thirdly calculation
fourthly balancing of chances fifthly
victory
measurement owes its existence to earth
estimation of quantity to measurement
calculation to estimation of quantity
balancing of chances to calculation
and victory to balancing of chances
a victorious army opposed to a routed
one is as a pound weight placed in a
scale against a single grain
the on rush of a conquering force is
like the bursting of pent-up waters into
a chasm a thousand fathoms deep
chapter five
energy
sun tzu said the control of a large
force is the same principle as the
control of a few men it is merely a
question of dividing up their numbers
fighting with a large army under your
command is no wise different from
fighting with a small one it is merely a
question of instituting signs and
signals
to ensure that your whole host may
withstand the brunt of the enemy's
attack and remain unshaken
this is effective by maneuvers direct
and indirect
then the impact of your army may be like
a grindstone dashed against an egg this
is affected by the science of weak
points and strong
in all fighting the direct method may be
used for joining battle but indirect
methods will be needed in order to
secure victory
indirect tactics efficiently applied are
inexhaustible as heaven and earth and
ending as the flow of rivers and streams
like the sun and moon they end but to
begin anew like the four seasons they
pass away to return once more
there are not more than five musical
notes yet the combinations of these five
give rise to more melodies than can ever
be heard
there are not more than five primary
colors blue yellow red white black
yet in combination they produce more
hues that can ever be seen
there are not more than five cardinal
tastes sour acrid salt sweet bitter
yet combinations of them yield more
flavors than can ever be tasted
in battles there are not more than two
methods of attack the direct and the
indirect yet these two in combination
give rise to an endless series of
maneuvers
the direct and the indirect lead on to
each other in turn it is like moving in
a circle you never come to an end who
can exhaust the possibilities of their
combination
the onset of troops is like the rush of
a torrent which will even roll stones
along in its course
the quality of decision is like the
well-timed swoop of a falcon which
enables it to strike and destroy its
victim
therefore the good fighter will be
terrible in his onset and prompt in his
decision
energy may be likened to the bending of
a crossbow decision to the releasing of
a trigger
amid the turmoil and tumult of battle
there may be seeming disorder and yet no
real disorder at all
amid confusion and chaos your array may
be without head or tail yet it will be
proof against defeat
simulated disorder postulates perfect
discipline simulated fear postulates
courage simulated weakness postulates
strength
hiding order between the cloak of
disorder is simply a question of
subdivision
concealing courage under a show of
timidity presupposes a fund of latent
energy masking strength with weakness is
to be affected by tactical dispositions
thus one who is skillful at keeping the
enemy on the move maintains deceitful
appearances according to which the enemy
will act
he sacrifices something that the enemy
may snatch at
by holding our baits he keeps him on the
march then with the body of pikmin he
lies in wait for him
the clever competent looks to the effect
of combined energy does not require too
much from individuals
hence his ability to pick out the right
men and utilize combined energy
when he utilizes combined energy his
fighting men become as it were like onto
rolling logs or stones
for it is in the nature of a log or a
stone to remain motionless on level
ground and to move when on a slope
if four cornered to come to a standstill
but if round shaped to go rolling down
thus the energy developed by good
fighting men is as the momentum of a
round stone rolled down a mountain
thousands of feet in height
so much on the subject of energy
chapter six
weak points and strong
sun tzu said whoever is first in the
field and awaits the coming of the enemy
will be fresh for the fight whoever is
second in the field and has to hasten to
battle will arrive exhausted
therefore the clever combatant imposes
his will on the enemy but does not allow
the enemy's will to be imposed on him
by holding out advantages to him he can
cause the enemy to approach of his own
accord
or by inflicting damage he can make it
impossible for the enemy to draw near if
the enemy is taking his ease he can
harass him
if well supplied with food he can starve
him out
if quietly encamped he can force him to
move
appear at points which the enemy must
hasten to defend
march swiftly to places where you are
not expected
an army may march great distances
without distress if it marches through
country where the enemy is not
you can be sure of succeeding in your
attacks if you only attack places which
are undefended
you can ensure the safety of your
defense if you only hold positions that
cannot be attacked
hence that general is skillful attack
whose opponent does not know what to
defend
and he is skillful in defense whose
opponent does not know what to attack
no divine art of subtlety and secrecy
through you we learn to be invisible
through you inaudible and hence we can
hold the enemy's fate in our hands
you may advance and be absolutely
irresistible if you make for the enemy's
weak points
you may retire and be safe for pursuit
if your movements are more rapid than
those of the enemy
if we wish to fight the enemy can be
forced to an engagement even though he
be sheltered behind a high rampart and a
deep ditch
all we need to do is attack some other
place that he will be obliged to relieve
if we do not wish to fight we can
prevent the enemy from engaging us even
though the lines of our encampment be
merely traced out on the ground all we
need to do is to throw something odd and
unaccountable in his way
by discovering the enemy's dispositions
and remaining invisible ourselves we can
keep our forces concentrated while the
enemies must be divided
we can form a single united body while
the enemy must split up into fractions
hence there will be a hole pitted
against separate parts of a hole which
means that we shall be many to the
enemy's few
and if we are able thus to attack an
inferior force with the superior one our
opponents will be in dire straits
the spot where we intend to fight must
not be made known for then the enemy
will have to prepare against a possible
attack at several different points and
his forces being thus distributed in
many directions the numbers we shall
have to face at any given point will be
proportionately few
four should the enemy strengthen his van
he will weaken his rear should he
strengthen his rear he will weaken his
van should he strengthen his left he
will weaken his right should he
strengthen his right he will weaken his
left
if he sends reinforcements everywhere he
will everywhere be weak
numerical weakness comes from having to
prepare against possible attacks
numerical strength from compelling our
adversary to make these preparations
against us
knowing the place and the time of the
coming battle we may concentrate from
the greatest distances in order to fight
but if neither time nor place be known
then the left wing will be impotent to
sucker the right the right equally
impotent to sucker the left
the van unable to relieve the rear or
the rear to support the van
how much more so if the furthest
portions of the army are anything under
a hundred lie apart and even the nearest
are separated by several li
though according to my estimate the
soldiers away exceeded our only number
that shall advantage them nothing in the
matter of victory
i say then that victory can be achieved
though the enemy be stronger in numbers
we may prevent him from fighting schemes
as to discover his plans and the
likelihood of their success
arouse him and learn the principle of
his activity or inactivity
force him to reveal himself so as to
find out his vulnerable spots
carefully compare the opposing army with
your own so that you may know where
strength is super abundant and where it
is deficient
in making tactical dispositions the
highest pitch you can attain is to
conceal them conceal your dispositions
and you will be safe from the prying of
the subtlest spies from the machinations
of the wisest brains
how victory may be produced for them out
of the enemy's own tactics
that is what the multitude cannot
comprehend
all men can see the tactics whereby i
conquer but what none can seize the
strategy out of which victory is evolved
do not repeat the tactics which have
gained you one victory but let your
methods be regulated by the infinite
variety of circumstances
military tactics are like underwater for
water in its natural course runs away
from high places and hastens downwards
so in war the way is to avoid what is
strong and to strike at what is weak
water shapes its course according to the
nature of the ground over which it flows
the soldier works out his victory in
relation to the foe whom he is facing
therefore just as water retains no
constant shape so in warfare there are
no constant conditions
he who can modify his tactics in
relation to his opponent and thereby
succeed in winning may be called a
heaven-born captain
the five elements water fire wood metal
earth are not always equally predominant
the four seasons make way for each other
in turn there are short days and long
the moon has its periods of waning and
waxing
chapter 7 maneuvering
sun tzu said
in war the general receives his command
from the sovereign
having collected an army and
concentrated his forces he must blend
and harmonize the different elements
thereof before pitching his camp
after that comes tactical maneuvering
than which there is nothing more
difficult
the difficulty of tactical maneuvering
consists in turning the devious into the
direct and misfortune into gain
thus to take on long and sequitus root
after enticing the enemy out of the way
and those starting after him to contrive
to reach the goal before him shows
knowledge of the artifice of deviation
maneuvering with an army is advantageous
with an undisciplined multitude most
dangerous
if you set a fully equipped army in
march in order to snatch an advantage
the chances are that you will be too
late
on the other hand to detach a flying
column for the purpose involves the
sacrifice of its baggage and stores
thus if you order your men to roll up
their buff coats and make forced marches
without halting day or night covering
double the usual distance at a stretch
doing a hundred li in order to rest an
advantage the leaders of all your three
divisions will fall into the hands of
the enemy
the stronger men will be in front the
jaded ones will fall behind and on this
plan only one tenth of your army will
reach its destination
if you march 50 li in order to
outmaneuver the enemy you will lose the
leader of your first division and only
half your force will reach the goal
if you march 30 li with the same object
two-thirds of your army will arrive
we may take it then that an army without
its baggage train is lost without
provisions it is lost without basis of
supply it is lost
we cannot enter into alliance until we
are acquainted with the designs of our
neighbors
we're not fit to lead an army on the
march unless we are familiar with the
face of the country its mountains and
forests its pitfalls and precipices
its marshes and swamps
we shall be unable to turn natural
advantage to account unless we make use
of local guides
in war practice dissimulation and you
will succeed
whether to concentrate or to divide your
troops must be decided by circumstances
let your rapidity be that of the wind
your compactness that of the forest
in raiding and plundering be like fire
immovability is like a mountain
let your plans be dark and impenetrable
as night and when you move fall like a
thunderbolt
when you plunder a countryside let the
spoil be divided amongst your men when
you capture new territory cut it up into
allotments for the benefit of the
soldiery
ponder and deliberate before you make a
move he will conquer who has learned the
artifice of deviation
such is the art of maneuvering
the book of army management says on the
field of battle the spoken word does not
carry far enough
hence the institution of gongs and drums
nor can ordinary objects be seen clearly
enough
hence the institution of banners and
flags
gongs and drums banners and flags are
means whereby the ears and eyes of the
host may be focused on one particular
point
the host thus forming a single united
body it is impossible either for the
brave to advance alone or for the
cowardly to retreat alone
this is the art of handling large masses
of men
in night fighting then make much use of
signal fires and drums and in fighting
by day are flags and banners as a means
of influencing the ears and eyes of your
army the whole army may be robbed of its
spirit a commander-in-chief may be
robbed of his presence of mind
now a soldier's spirit is keenest in the
morning by noonday it has begun to flag
and in the evening his mind is bent only
on returning to camp
a clever general therefore avoids an
army when the spirit is keen but attacks
it when it is sluggish and inclined to
return
this is the art of studying moods
disciplined and calm to await the
appearance of disorder and hubbub
amongst the enemy this is the art of
retaining self-possession
to be near the goal while the enemy is
still far from it to wait at ease while
the enemy is toiling and struggling
to be well fed while the enemy is
famished
this is the art of husband england's
strength
to refrain from intercepting an enemy
whose banners are in perfect order to
refrain from attacking an army drawn up
in calm and confident array
this is the art of studying
circumstances
it is a military axiom not to advance
uphill against the enemy nor to oppose
him when he comes downhill
do not pursue an enemy who simulates
flight do not attack soldiers whose
temper is keen
do not swallow bait offered by the enemy
do not interfere with an army that is
returning home
when you surround an army leave an
outlet free do not press a desperate foe
too hard
such is the art of warfare
chapter 8 variation in tactics
sun tzu said in war the general receives
his commands from the sovereign collects
his army and concentrates his forces
when in difficult country do not in camp
in country where high roads intersect
join hands with your allies do not
linger in dangerously isolated positions
in hammed in situations you must resort
to stratagem
in desperate position you must fight
there are roads which must not be
followed armies which must not be
attacked
towns which must be besieged positions
which must not be contested
command of the sovereign which must not
be obeyed
the general who thoroughly understands
the advantages that accompany variation
of tactics knows how to handle his
troops
the general who does not understand
these may be well acquainted with the
configuration of the country yet he will
not be able to turn his knowledge to
practical account
so the student of war who is unversed in
the art of war of varying his plans even
though he be acquainted with the five
advantages will fail to make the best
use of his men
hence in the wise leaders plans
considerations of advantage and of
disadvantage will be blended together
if our expectation of advantage be
tempered in this way we may succeed in
accomplishing the essential part of our
schemes
if on the other hand in the midst of
difficulties we are always ready to
seize an advantage we may extricate
ourselves from misfortune
reduce the hostile chiefs by inflicting
damage on them and make trouble for them
and keep them constantly engaged
hold out specious alermans and make them
rush to any given point
the art of war teaches us to rely not on
the likelihood of the enemies not coming
but on our own readiness to receive him
not on the chance of his not attacking
but rather on the fact that we have made
our position unassailable
there are five dangerous faults which
may affect a general
one recklessness which leads to
destruction
two
cowardice which leads to capture
3. a hasty temper which can be provoked
by insults
4. a delicacy of honor which is
sensitive to shame
5.
over-solicitude for his men which
exposes him to worry and trouble
these are the five besetting sins of a
general ruiners to the conduct of war
when an army is overthrown and its
leader slain the cause will surely be
found among these five dangerous faults
let them be subject of meditation
chapter nine the army on the march
sun tzu said we come now to the question
of encamping the army and observing
signs of the enemy
pass quickly over mountains and keep in
the neighborhood of valleys
camp in high places facing the sun do
not climb heights in order to fight so
much for mountain warfare
after crossing a river you should get
far away from it
when an invading force crosses a river
in its onward march do not advance to
meet it midstream it will be best to let
half the army get across and then
deliver your attack
if you are anxious to fight you should
not go to meet the invader near a river
which he has to cross
more your craft higher up than the enemy
and facing the sun do not move upstream
to meet the enemy
so much for river warfare
in crossing salt marshes your sole
concern should be to get over them
quickly without any delay
if forced to fight in a salt marsh you
should have water and grass near you and
get your back to a clump of trees
so much for operations in salt marshes
in dry level country take up an easily
accessible position with rising ground
to your right and on your rear so that
the danger may be in front and safety
lie behind
so much for campaigning in flat country
these are four useful branches of
military knowledge which enabled the
yellow emperor to vanquish four several
sovereigns
all armies prefer high ground to low and
sunny places to dark
if you are careful with your men and
camp on hard ground the army will be
free from disease of every kind and this
will spell victory
when you come to a hill or a bank occupy
the sunny side with the slope on your
right rear thus you will at once act for
the benefit of your soldiers and utilize
the natural advantages of the ground
when in consequence of heavy rains up
country a river which you wish to afford
is swollen and flecked with foam you
must wait till it subsides
country in which there are precipitous
cliffs with torrents running between
deep natural hollows confined places
tangled thickets quagmires and crevices
should be left with all possible speed
and not approached
while we keep away from such places we
should get the enemy to approach them
while we face them we should let the
enemy have them on its rear if in the
neighborhood of your camp there should
be any hidden country ponds surrounded
by aquatic grass hollow basins filled
with reeds or woods with thick
undergrowth they must be carefully
routed out and searched for these are
places where men in ambush or insidious
spies are likely to be lurking
when the enemy is close at hand and
remains quiet he is relying on the
natural strength of his position
when he keeps aloof and tries to provoke
a battle he is anxious for the other
side to advance
if his place of encampment is easy of
access he is tendering a bait
movement amongst the trees of a forest
shows that the enemy is advancing
the appearance of a number of screens in
the midst of thick grass means that the
enemy wants to make us suspicious
the rising of birds that flight is the
sign of an ambuscade startled beast
indicate that a sudden attack is coming
when there is dust rising in a high
column it is the sign of chariots
advancing
when the dust is low but spread over a
wide area it be tokens the approach of
infantry
when it branches out in different
directions it shows that parties have
been sent to collect firewood
a few clouds of dust moving to and fro
signify that the army is in camping
humble words and increase preparations
are signs that the enemy is about to
advance
violent language and driving forward as
if to attack are signs that he will
retreat
when the light chariots come out first
and take up a position on the wings it
is a sign that the enemy is forming for
battle
peace proposals unaccompanied by a sworn
covenant indicate a plot
when there is much running about and the
soldiers fall into rank it means that
the critical moment has come
when some are seen advancing and some
retreating it is allure
when the soldiers stand leaning on their
spears they are faint from want of
food if those who are sent to draw water
begin by drinking themselves the army is
suffering from thirst
if the enemy sees an advantage to be
gained and makes no effort to secure it
the soldiers are exhausted
if birds gather on any spot it is
unoccupied clamour by night be tokens
nervousness
if there is a disturbance in the camp
the general's authority is weak if the
banners and flags are shifted about
sedition is afoot if the officers are
angry it means the men are weary
when an army feeds its horses with grain
and kills its cattle for food and when
the men do not hang their cookie bots
over the campfires showing that they
will not return to their tents you may
know that they are determined to fight
to the death
the sign of men whispering together in
small knots or speaking in subdued tones
points to disaffection amongst the rank
and file
two frequent rewards signify that the
enemies at the end of his resources
too many punishments betray a condition
of dire distress
to begin by bluster but afterwards to
take fright at the enemy's numbers shows
a supreme lack of intelligence
when envoys are sent with compliments in
their mouths it is a sign that the enemy
wishes for a truce
if the enemy's troops march up angrily
and remain facing ours for a long time
without either joining battle or taking
themselves off again the situation is
one that demands great vigilance and
circumspection
if our troops are no more in numbers
than the enemy that is amply sufficient
it only means that no direct attack can
be made
what we can do is simply to concentrate
all our available strength keep a close
watch on the enemy and obtain
reinforcements
he who exercises no forethought but
makes light of his opponents is sure to
be captured by them
if soldiers are punished before they
have grown attached to you they will not
prove submissive and unless submissive
then will be practically useless
if when soldiers have become attached to
you punishments are not enforced they
will still be useless
therefore soldiers must be treated in
the first instance with humanity but
kept under control by means of iron
discipline
this is a certain road to victory
if in training soldiers commands are
habitually enforced the army will be
well disciplined if not its discipline
will be bad
if a general shows confidence in his men
but always insists on his orders being
obeyed the gain will be mutual
chapter 10 terrain
sun tzu said we may distinguish six
kinds of terrain to with one accessible
ground
two entangling ground
three
temporizing ground
four narrow passes
five precipitous heights
six positions at a great distance from
the enemy
ground which can be freely traversed by
both sides is called accessible
with regard to ground of this nature be
before the enemy in occupying the raised
and sunny spots
and carefully guard your line of
supplies then you will be able to fight
with advantage
ground which can be abandoned but is
hard to reoccupy is called entangling
from a position of this sort if the
enemy is unprepared you may sally forth
and defeat him
but if the enemy is prepared for your
coming and you fail to defeat him then
return being impossible disasters will
ensue
when the position is such that neither
side will gain by making the first move
it is called temporizing ground
in a position of this sort even though
the enemy should offer us an attractive
bait it will be advisable not to stir
forth but rather to retreat thus
enticing the enemy in his turn then when
part of his army has come out we may
deliver our attack with advantage
with regard to narrow passes if you can
occupy them first let them be strongly
garrisoned and await the advent of the
enemy
should the army forestall you in
occupying a pass do not go after him if
the pass is fully garrisoned but only if
it is weakly garrisoned
with regard to precipitous heights if
you are beforehand with your adversary
you should occupy the raised and sunny
spots and there wait for him to come up
if the enemy has occupied them before
you do not follow him but retreat and
try to entice him away
if you are situated at a great distance
from the enemy and the strength of the
two armies is equal it is not easy to
provoke a battle and fighting will be to
your disadvantage
these six other principles connected
with earth the general who has attained
a responsible post must be careful to
study them
now an army is exposed to six several
calamities not arising from natural
causes but from faults for which the
general is responsible
these are
one flight
two
insubordination three collapse
four
ruin
five disorganization
six route
now the conditions are being equal if
one force is hurled against another ten
times its size the result will be the
flight of the former
when the common soldiers are too strong
and their officers too weak the result
is insubordination
when the officers are too strong and the
common soldiers too weak the result is
collapse
when the higher officers are angry and
insubordinate and on meeting the enemy
give battle on their own account from a
feeling of resentment before the
commander-in-chief can tell whether or
no he is in a position to fight
the result is ruin
when the general is weak and without
authority when his orders are not clear
and distinct
when there are no fixed duties assigned
to officers and men and the ranks are
formed in a slovenly haphazard manner
the result is utter disorganization
when a general unable to estimate the
enemy's strength allows an inferior
force to engage a larger one or hurls a
weak detachment against a powerful one
and neglects to place picked soldiers in
the front rank
the result must be route
there are six ways of courting defeat
which must be carefully noted by the
general who has attained a responsible
post
the natural formation of the country is
the soldier's best ally but a power of
estimating the adversary of controlling
the forces of victory and of shrewdly
calculating difficulties dangers and
distances constitutes the test of a
great general
he who knows these things and in
fighting puts his knowledge into
practice will win his battles
he who knows them not nor practices them
will surely be defeated
if fighting is sure to result in victory
then you must fight
even though the ruler forbid it if
fighting will not result in victory then
you must not fight even at the ruler's
bidding
the general who advances without
coveting fame and retreats without
fearing disgrace whose only thought is
to protect his country and do good
service for his sovereign is the jewel
of the kingdom
regard your soldiers as your children
and they will follow you into the
deepest valleys
look upon them as your own beloved sons
and they will stand by you even unto
death
if however you are indulgent but unable
to make your authority felt kind-hearted
but unable to enforce your commands
and incapable moreover of quelling
disorder then your soldiers must be
likened to spoil children they are
useless for any practical purpose
if we know that our own men are in a
condition to attack but are unaware that
the enemy is not open to attack we have
gone only halfway towards victory
if we know that the enemy is open to
attack but are unaware that our own men
are not in a condition to attack
we have only gone halfway towards
victory
if we know that the enemy is open to
attack and also know that our men are in
a condition to attack but are unaware
that the nature of the ground makes
fighting impractical we have still gone
only halfway towards victory
hence the experienced soldier once in
motion is never bewildered once he has
broken camp he is never at a loss
hence the saying if you know the enemy
and know yourself your victory will not
stand in doubt
if you know heaven and no earth you may
make your victory complete
chapter 11
the nine situations
sun tzu said the art of war recognizes
nine varieties of ground
one dispersive ground
two
facile ground
three
contentious ground
four
open ground
five ground of intersecting highways
six
serious ground
seven
difficult ground
eight
hemmed in ground
nine desperate ground
when a chieftain is fighting in his own
territory it is dispersive ground
when he has penetrated into hostile
territory but to no great distance it is
facile ground
ground the possession of which imports
great advantage to either side is
contentious ground
ground on which each side has liberty of
movement is open ground
ground which forms the key to three
contiguous states so that he who
occupies it first has most of the empire
at his command is a ground of
intersecting highways
when an army has penetrated into the
heart of a hostile country leaving a
number of fortified cities in its rear
it is serious ground
mountain forests rugged steeps marshes
and fence all country that is hard to
traverse
this is difficult ground
ground which is reached through narrow
gorges and from which we can only retire
by tortuous paths so that a small number
of the enemy would suffice to crush a
large body of our men
this is hemmed in ground
ground on which we can only be saved
from destruction by fighting without
delay is desperate ground
on dispersive ground therefore fight not
on facile ground halt not on contentious
ground attack knot
on open ground do not try to block the
enemy's way
on the ground of intersecting highways
join hands with your allies
on serious ground gather in plunder in
difficult ground keep steadily on the
march
on hemmed in ground resort to stratagen
on desperate ground
fight
those who are called skillful leaders of
old knew how to drive a wedge between
the enemies front and rear to prevent
cooperation between his large and small
divisions to hinder the good troops from
rescuing the bad the officers from
rallying their men
when the enemy's men were united they
managed to keep them in disorder
when it was to their advantage they made
a forward move when otherwise they stop
still
if asked how to cope with a great host
of the enemy in orderly array and on the
point of marching to the attack i should
say
begin by seizing something which your
opponent holds dear
then he will be amenable to your will
rapidity is the essence of war take
advantage of the enemy's unreadiness
make your way by unexpected roots and
attack unguarded spots
the following other principles to be
observed by an invading force
the further you penetrate into a country
the greater will be the solidarity of
your troops
and thus the defenders will not prevail
against you
make forays infertile country in order
to supply your army with food
carefully study the well-being of your
men and do not overtax them
concentrate your energy and horde your
strength
keep your army continually on the move
and devise unfathomable plans
throw your soldiers into positions
whence there is no escape and they will
prefer death to flight if they will face
death there is nothing they may not
achieve
officers and men alike will put forward
their uttermost strength
soldiers when in desperate straits lose
the sense of fear if there is no place
of refuge they will stand firm
if they are in hostile country they will
show a stubborn front
if there is no help for it they will
fight hard
thus without waiting to be marshaled the
soldiers will be constantly on the tv
without waiting to be asked they will do
your will without restrictions they will
be faithful without giving orders they
can be trusted
prohibit the taking of romans and do
away with superstitious doubts then
until death itself comes no calamity
need be feared
if our soldiers are not overburdened
with money it is not because they have a
distaste for riches
if their lives are not unduly long
it is not because they are disinclined
to longevity
on the day they are ordered out to
battle your soldiers may weep
those sitting up bedewing their garments
and those lying down letting the tears
run down their cheeks
but let them once be brought to bay and
they will display the courage of a chew
or a cui
the skillful tactician may be likened to
the schweijen now the srijan is a snake
that is found in the jiung mountains
strike at its head and you will be
attacked by its tail strike at its tail
and you will be attacked by its head
strike at his middle and you will be
attacked by the head and tail both
asked if an army can be made to imitate
the schweijen i should answer yes
for the men of wu and the men of ue are
enemies yet if they are crossing a river
in the same boat and are caught by a
storm they will come to each other's
assistance just as the left hand helps
the right
hence it is not enough to put one's
trust in the tethering horses and the
burying of chariot wheels in the ground
the principle on which to manage an army
is to set up one standard of courage
which all must reach
how to make the best of both strong and
weak
that is a question involving the proper
use of ground
thus the skillful general conducts his
army just as though he were leading a
single man willy-nilly by the hand it is
the business of a general to be quiet
and thus ensure secrecy upright and just
and thus maintain order
he must be able to mystify his officers
and men by false reports and appearances
and thus keep them in total ignorance
by altering his arrangements and
changing his plans he keeps the enemy
without definite knowledge
by shifting his camp and taking
siquita's roots he prevents the enemy
from anticipating his purpose
at the critical moment the leader of an
army acts like one who has climbed up a
height and then kicks away the ladder
behind him
he carries his men deep into hostile
territory before he shows his hand
he burns his boats and breaks his
cooking pots
like a shepherd driving a flock of sheep
he drives his men this way and that and
nothing knows whether he is going
to muster his host and bring it into
danger this may be termed the business
of the general
the different measures suited to the
nine varieties of ground the expediency
of aggressive or defensive tactics and
the fundamental laws of human nature
these are things that must most
certainly be studied
when invading hostile territory the
general principle is that penetrating
deeply brings cohesion
penetrating but a short way means
dispersion
when you leave your own country behind
and take your army across neighborhood
territory you find yourself on critical
ground
there are means of communication on all
four sides the ground is one of
intersecting highways
when you penetrate deeply into a country
it is serious ground
when you penetrate but a little way it
is facile ground
when you have your enemy's strongholds
on your rear and narrow passes in front
it is hemmed in ground
when there is no place of refuge at all
it is desperate ground
therefore on dispersive ground i would
inspire my men with unity of purpose
on facile ground i would see that there
is close connection between all parts of
my army
on contentious ground i would hurry up
my rear
on open ground i would keep a vigilant
eye on my defenses on ground of
intersecting highways i would
consolidate my alliances
serious ground i would try to ensure a
continuous stream of supplies
on difficult ground i would keep pushing
on along the road
on hemmed in ground i would block any
way of retreat
on desperate ground i would proclaim to
my soldiers the hopelessness of saving
their lives
for it is the soldier's disposition to
offer an obstinate resistance when
surrounded to fight hard when he cannot
help himself and to obey promptly when
he has fallen into danger
we cannot enter into alliance with the
neighboring princes until we are
acquainted with their designs
we are not fit to lead an army on the
march unless we are familiar with the
face of the country
its mountains and forests its pitfalls
and precipices its marshes and swamps
we shall be unable to turn natural
advantages to account unless we make use
of local guides
to be ignored of any one of the
following four or five principles does
not befit a war-like prince
when a warlike prince attacks a powerful
state his generalship shows itself in
preventing the concentration of the
enemy's forces
he overalls his opponents and their
allies are prevented from joining
against him
hence he does not strive to allow
himself with all and sundry nor does he
foster the power of other states
he carries out his own secret designs
keeping his antagonists in awe
thus he is able to capture their cities
and overthrow their kingdoms
bestow rewards without regard to rule
issue orders without regard to previous
arrangements and you will be able to
handle a whole army as though you had to
do it with but a single man
confront your soldiers with the deed
itself
never let them know your design
when the outlook is bright bring it
before their eyes but tell them nothing
when the situation is gloomy
place your army in deadly peril and it
will survive
plunge it into desperate straits and it
will come off in safety
for it is precisely when a force has
fallen into harm's way that it is
capable of striking a blow for victory
success in warfare is gained by
carefully accommodating ourselves to the
enemy's purpose
by persistently hanging on to the
enemy's flank we shall succeed in the
long run in killing the
commander-in-chief
this is called ability to accomplish a
thing by sheer cunning
on the day that you take up your command
block the frontier passes destroy the
official tallies and stop the passage of
all emissaries
stone in the council chamber so that you
may control the situation
if the enemy leaves the door open you
must rush in
for stall your opponent by seizing what
he holds dear and subtly contrived to
time his arrival on the ground
walk in the path defined by rule and
accommodate yourselves to the enemy
until you can fight a decisive battle
at first then exhibit the coinness of a
maiden until the enemy gives you an
opening
afterwards emulate the rapidity of a
running hair and it will be too late for
the enemy to oppose you
chapter 12
the attack by fire
sun tzu said there are five ways of
attacking with fire
the first is to burn the soldiers in
their camp
the second is to burn stalls
the third is to burn baggage trains the
fourth is to burn arsenals and magazines
the fifth is to hurl dropping fire
amongst the enemy
in order to carry out an attack we must
have means available
the material for raising fire should
always be kept in readiness
there is a proper season for making
attacks with fire and special days for
starting a conflagration
the proper season is when the weather is
very dry
the special days are those when the moon
is in the constellations of the sieve
the wall the wing or the crossbar for
these four are all days of rising wind
in attacking with fire one should be
prepared to meet five possible
developments
when fire breaks out inside the enemy's
camp respond at once with an attack for
without
if there is an outbreak of fire but the
enemy's soldiers remain quiet bide your
time and do not attack
when the force of the flames has reached
its height follow up with an attack if
that is practicable if not stay where
you are
if it is possible to make an assault
with fire from without do not wait for
it to break out within but deliver your
attack at a favorable moment
when you start a fire beat a windward of
it do not attack from the leeward
a wind that rises in the daytime lasts
long but the night breeze soon falls
in every army the five developments
connected with fire must be known the
movements of the stars calculated and a
watch kept for the proper days
hence those who use fire as an aid to
the attack show intelligence those who
use water as an aid to the attack gain
an accession of strength
by means of water an enemy may be
intercepted but not robbed of all his
belongings
unhappy is the fate of one who tries to
win his battles and succeed in his
attacks without cultivating the spirit
of enterprise
for the result is a waste of time and
general stagnation
hence the same the enlightened ruler
lays his plans well the good general
cultivates his resources
move not until you see an advantage use
not your troops unless there is
something to be gained
fight not unless the position is
critical
no ruler should put troops into the
field merely to gratify his own spleen
no general should fight a battle simply
out of peak
if it is to your advantage make a
forward move
if not stay where you are
anger may in time change to gladness
vexation may be succeeded by content
but a kingdom that has once been
destroyed
can never come back again into being nor
can the dead ever be brought back to
life
hence the enlightened ruler is heedful
and the good general full of caution
this is the way to keep a country at
peace and an army intact
chapter 13 the use of spies
sun tzu said
raising a host of a hundred thousand men
and marching them great distances
entails heavy loss on the people and a
drain on the resources of the state
the daily expenditure will amount to a
thousand ounces of silver there will be
commotion at home and abroad and men
will drop down exhausted on the highways
as many as seven hundred thousand
families will be impeded in their labor
hostile armies may face each other for
years striving for the victory which is
decided in a single day
this being so to remain in ignorance of
the enemy's condition simply because one
grudges the outlay of a hundred ounces
of silver in honors and emoluments is
the height of inhumanity
one who acts thus is no leader of men
no present help to his sovereign no
master of victory
thus what enables the wise sovereign and
the good general to strike and conquer
and achieve things beyond the reach of
ordinary men is for knowledge
now this foreknowledge cannot be
elicited from spirits it cannot be
obtained inductively from experience nor
by any deductive calculation
knowledge of the enemy's dispositions
can only be obtained from other men
hence the use of spies of whom there are
five classes
one local spies
two inward spies
three converted spies
four
doomed spies
five surviving spies
when these five kinds of spy are all at
work none can discover the secret system
this is called divine manipulation of
the threads
it is the sovereign's most precious
faculty
having local spies means employing the
services of the inhabitants of a
district
having inward spies making use of
officials of the enemy
having converted spies getting hold of
the enemy's spies and using them for our
own purposes
having doomed spies doing certain things
openly for purposes of deception and
allowing our spies to know of them and
report them to the enemy
surviving spies finally are those who
bring back news from the enemy's camp
hence it is that which none in the whole
army are more intimate relations to be
maintained than with spies
none should be more liberally rewarded
in no other business should greater
secrecy be preserved
spies cannot be usefully employed
without a certain intuitive sagacity
they cannot be properly managed without
benevolence and straightforwardness
without subtle ingenuity of mind one
cannot make certain of the truth of
their reports
be subtle be subtle and use your spies
for every kind of business
if a secret piece of news is divulged by
a spy before the time is ripe he must be
put to death together with the man to
whom the secret was told
whether the object be to crush an army
to storm a city or to assassinate an
individual it is always necessary to
begin by finding out the names of the
attendants the aids decamp and
doorkeepers and centers of the general
in command
our spies must be commissioned to
ascertain these
the enemy spies who have come to spy on
us must be sought out tempted with
bribes led away and comfortably housed
thus they will become converted spies
and available for our service
it is through the information brought by
the converted spy that we are able to
acquire and employ local and inward
spies
it is owing to his information again
that we can cause the doomed spy to
carry false tidings to the enemy
lastly it is by his information that the
surviving spy can be used on appointed
occasions
the end and aim of spying in all his
five varieties is knowledge of the enemy
and this knowledge can only be derived
in the first instance
from the converted spy
hence it is essential that the converted
spy be treated with the utmost
liberality
of old the rise of the yin dynasty was
due to ai chi who had served under the
hisya likewise the rise of the cho
dynasty was due to luya who had served
under the yin
hence it is only the enlightened ruler
and the wise general who will use the
highest intelligence of the army for
purposes of spying and thereby they
achieve great results
spies are a most important element in
water because on them depends an army's
ability to move
you